and informational texts for many purposes (including enjoyment),
This includes independently and proficiently understanding grade-level text.
Key Ideas & Details - Grades 11 - 12
R.11-12.1 Cite relevant textual evidence that strongly supports
analysis of what the text says explicitly or implicitly and make
logical inferences, including determining where the text is
ambiguous; develop questions for deeper understanding and for
further exploration. (RI&RL)
EE.R.11-12.1 Analyze a text to determine its meaning and cite
textual evidence to support explicit and implicit understandings.
(RI&RL)
R.11-12.2 Objectively and accurately summarize a complex text
to determine two or more themes or central ideas and analyze their
development, including how they emerge and are shaped and
refined by specific details. (RI&RL)
EE.R.11-12.2 Recount the main events or ideas of a text which are
related to the theme or central idea. (RI&RL)
R.11-12.3 In literary texts, analyze the impact of the author's
choices. (RL)
In informational texts, analyze a complex set of ideas or sequence of
events and explain how specific individuals, ideas, or events interact
and develop. (RI)
EE.R.11-12.3 Determine how characters, individuals, settings,
ideas, or events change over the course of the text. (RI&RL)
<<page 49>>
and informational texts for many purposes (including enjoyment),
This includes independently and proficiently understanding grade-level text.
Craft & Structure - Grades 11 - 12
R.11-12.4 Determine the meaning of words and phrases,
including figurative and connotative meanings. Analyze the impact
of specific word choices on meaning, tone, and mood, including
words with multiple meanings. Analyze how an author uses and
refines the meaning of technical or key term(s) over the course of a
text. (RI&RL)
EE.R.11-12.4 Determine how words or phrases in a text, including
words with multiple meanings and figurative language, impact the
meaning. (RI&RL)
R.11-12.5 In literary texts, analyze how varied aspects of
structure create meaning and affect the reader. (RL)
In informational texts, analyze the impact and evaluate the effect
structure has on exposition or argument in terms of clarity,
persuasive or rhetorical technique, and audience appeal. (RI)
EE.R.11-12.5 Use a text’s ending (e.g., story (RL)) or structure (e.g,
informational (RI) and determine its impact on meaning of the text
as a whole.
R.11-12.6 Analyze how authors employ point of view,
perspective, and purpose to shape explicit and implicit messages
(e.g., persuasiveness, aesthetic quality, satire, sarcasm, irony, or
understatement). Explain how an author’s geographic location,
identity, and culture affect perspective. (RI&RL)
EE.R.11-12.6 Determine author’s point of view and compare and
contrast it with own point of view. (RI&RL)
<<page 50>>
and informational texts for many purposes (including enjoyment),
This includes independently and proficiently understanding grade-level text.
Integration of Knowledge & Ideas - Grades 11 - 12
R.11-12.7 In literary texts, analyze multiple adaptations of a
source text as presented in different formats (e.g., works of art,
graphic novels, music, film, etc.), specifically evaluating how each
version interprets the source. (RL)
In informational texts, integrate and evaluate sources on the same
topic or argument in order to address a question or solve a problem.
(RI)
EE.R.11-12.7 Compare two or more interpretations (e.g., recorded
or live production of a play or recorded novel or poetry) of a story,
drama, or poem. (RL) Analyze information presented in different
media on related topics to answer questions or solve problems. (RI)
R.11-12.8 Delineate and evaluate an argument in applicable texts,
applying a lens (e.g., constitutional principles, logical fallacy, legal
reasoning, belief systems, codes of ethics, philosophies, etc.) to
assess the validity or fallacy of key arguments, determining whether
the supporting evidence is relevant and sufficient. (RI)
EE.R.11-12.8 Determine whether the claims and reasoning
enhance the author’s argument in a text. (RI)
R.11-12.9 Choose and develop criteria to evaluate the quality of
texts. Make connections to other texts, ideas, cultural perspectives,
identities, eras, and personal experiences. (RI&RL)
EE.R.11-12.9 Evaluate the quality of texts; make connections to
other texts, ideas, cultural perspectives, identities, eras, and
personal events or situations. (RI&RL)
<<page 51>>
<<page 52>>
and rhetorically authentic tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
frames.
Text Types & Purposes - Grades 11-12
W.11-12.1 Compose reflective, formal, and creative writing,
which may happen simultaneously or independently, for a variety
of high-stakes and low-stakes purposes.
EE.W.11-12.1 With guidance and support as needed, use
dictating, or writing to compose writing for a variety of high-
stakes and low-stakes purposes.
W.11-12.2 Write text in a variety of modes.
a. Write arguments and literary analysis to support claims in
an analysis of substantive topics or texts. Establish the
significance of the claim(s) using valid reasoning, literary
theory, and relevant and sufficient evidence that introduce
precise claim(s); distinguish the claim(s) from alternate or
opposing claims; and create an organization that
establishes clear relationships among claim(s),
counterclaims, reasons, and evidence. Develop claim(s) and
counterclaims fairly, supplying evidence for each while
pointing out the strengths and limitations of both in a
manner that anticipates the audience's knowledge level
and concerns.
b. Write informative texts that examine and convey complex
ideas, concepts, and information clearly and accurately
through the effective selection, organization, and analysis
of content by introducing a topic; organizing complex
ideas, concepts, and information to make important
connections and distinctions; including formatting (e.g.,
headings), graphics (e.g., figures, tables), and multimedia
when useful to aiding comprehension; thoroughly
developing the topic by selecting the most significant and
relevant well-chosen facts, extended definitions, concrete
<<page 77>>
details, quotations, and other information and examples
appropriate to the audience's knowledge of the topic.
c. Write narratives that develop real or imagined experiences
or events using relevant descriptive details and well-
structured event sequences that organize an event
sequence logically. Engages and orients the reader by
establishing a context and point of view and introducing a
narrator or characters using techniques, such as dialogue,
pacing, description, and reflection, to develop experiences,
events, and/or characters.
EE.W.11-12.2 With guidance and support, use writing and/or
dictation to write in a variety of modes:
a. Write an argument or literary analysis with a clearly stated
claim and valid and sufficient reasons to support
the claim. Organize reasons logically and develop the
claim fairly.
b. Write informative texts which introduce a topic and
provide well chosen facts, details, quotes, and/or
multimedia content to develop the topic and convey
information clearly and accurately. Provide a concluding
statement.
c. Write narratives to convey events and experiences, real or
imagined. Include dialogue, relevant details,
characterization, and tell about the events and in a logical
sequence.
<<page 78>>
and rhetorically authentic tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
frames.
Text Types & Purposes - Grades 11-12 (cont.)
W.11-12.3 Create writing that utilizes:
a. Organization: Introduce a topic; organize complex ideas,
concepts, analysis, information, and claims, so that each
new element builds on that which precedes it to create a
unified whole. Establish and maintain a structure and
conventions consistent with the mode of writing. Provide a
concluding statement or section that follows from and
supports the topic, themes, and experiences presented in
the text.
b. Transitions: Use appropriate and varied transitions and
syntax to link the major sections of the text, create
cohesion, and clarify the relationships among complex
ideas and concepts.
c. Word Choice (including domain specific): Use culturally-
sustaining language and domain-specific vocabulary to
manage the complexity of the topic. Use techniques such
as metaphor, simile, and analogy to manage the complexity
of the topic.
EE.W.11-12.3 Use a combination of drawing, dictating and
writing to create a text that includes an introduction, body, and
conclusion, uses words that convey specific details, transitions to
link and build connections, and temporal words to signal event
order.
<<page 79>>
and rhetorically authentic tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
frames.
Production & Distribution of Writing - Grades 11-12
W.11-12.4 Produce clear and coherent writing in which the
development, organization, and style are culturally-sustaining and
rhetorically authentic to task, purpose, and audience. (Grade-
specific expectations for writing types are defined in standards 1-3
above.)
EE.W.11-12.4 Produce clear and coherent writing that is
appropriate to a particular task, purpose, and audience.
W.11-12.5 Develop and strengthen writing (collaboratively and
individually) as needed by planning, revising, editing, rewriting, or
trying a new approach, focusing on addressing what is most
significant for a specific purpose and audience.
EE.W.11-12.5 With guidance and support from adults and peers
as needed, plan before writing, produce writing for a specific
purpose and focused on a planned topic, and revise and edit their
own writing, dictation, or pictures.
W.11-12.6 Make informed and intentional decisions about
technology use (including paper and pencil, internet, audio, visual,
multilingual, multimodal, mobile, or other interactive formats) to
engage in authentic rhetorical tasks for specific purposes and
audiences. Such decisions include assessing particular technologies’
affordances for:
a. connecting writers and readers,
b. producing accessible experiences for specific audiences,
and
c. dynamically and flexibly matching modes with ideas to
communicate with readers.
<<page 80>>
EE.W.11-12.6 Make intentional decisions about technology use
(including paper and pencil, internet, audio, visual, and/or other
interactive formats) to produce, publish, and update individual or
shared writing products. Proficiently produce writing through
printing, cursive, and/or typing.
<<page 81>>
and rhetorically authentic tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
frames.
Inquiry to Build & Present Knowledge - Grades 11-12
W.11-12.7 Conduct short as well as more sustained research
projects to answer a question (including a self-generated question)
or solve a problem that is rhetorically authentic and culturally-
sustaining; narrow or broaden the inquiry when appropriate;
synthesize multiple sources on the subject, demonstrating an
understanding of the subject under investigation.
EE.W.11-12.7 With guidance and support as needed, conduct
inquiry projects to answer a question or solve a problem using
information from multiple sources.
W.11-12.8 Gather relevant information from multiple
authoritative print and digital sources, using advanced searches
effectively; assess the strengths and limitations of each source in
terms of the task, purpose, and audience; integrate information
into the text selectively to maintain the flow of ideas, avoiding
plagiarism and overreliance on any one source and following a
standard format for citation.
EE.W.11-12.8 Write answers to research questions by selecting
relevant information from multiple resources.
W.11-12.9 Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to
support analysis, reflection, and research. (Apply grades 11-12
Reading standards)
EE.W.11-12.9 With guidance and support from adults, draw
evidence from literary or informational texts to support reflection,
analysis or inquiry questions based on a reading of a literary or
informational text.
<<page 82>>
<<page 83>>
of purposes, audiences, and situations in order to meet communicative
differ for culture and context.
Comprehension & Collaboration - Grades 11-12
SL.11-12.1 Initiate and participate effectively in a range of
collaborative discussions (one- on- one, in groups, and teacher-led)
with diverse partners on topics, texts, and issues, listening actively,
and building on others' ideas and expressing their own clearly.
a. Come to discussions prepared, explicitly draw on that
preparation by referring to evidence from texts and other
research on the topic, text, or issue. Support analysis by
making connections, paraphrasing, clarifying, or explaining
the evidence.
b. Work with peers to promote civil, democratic discussions
and decision making and set clear goals. Reflect on progress
as an individual and as a group.
c. Propel conversations by posing and engaging with
questions that probe reasoning and evidence; ensure a
ahearing for a full range of positions on a topic or issue;
clarify, verify, or challenge ideas and conclusions. Promote
and seek to understand multiple, divergent, and creative
perspectives.
d. Engage thoughtfully with diverse perspectives; synthesize
comments, claims, and evidence made on all sides of an
issue; resolve contradictions when possible; and determine
what additional information or research is required to
deepen the investigation or complete the task.
EE.SL.11-12.1 Engage in collaborative discussions.
a. Prepare evidence for discussions by collecting information
on the topic and be able to explain it.
b. Work with peers to set norms and goals for discussions and
reflect on the conversation.
<<page 97>>
c. Ask and answer questions to verify or clarify own ideas and
understandings during a discussion.
d. Respond appropriately to agreements and disagreements in
a discussion.
SL.11-12.2 Analyze and synthesize multiple sources of
information presented in diverse media or formats in order to make
informed decisions and solve problems, evaluating the credibility
and accuracy of each source noting discrepancies among data.
EE.SL.11-12.2 Determine the credibility and accuracy of
information presented across diverse media or formats.
SL.11-12.3 Understand and evaluate a speaker’s point of view,
reasoning, and use of evidence and rhetoric, assessing the stance,
premises, links among ideas, word choice, points of emphasis, and
tone used.
EE.SL.11-12.3 Determine whether the claims and reasoning
enhance the speaker’s argument on a topic.
<<page 98>>
of purposes, audiences, and situations in order to meet communicative
differ for culture and context.
Presentation of Knowledge & Ideas - Grades 11-12
SL.11-12.4 Present information, findings, and supporting
evidence, conveying perspective, such that listeners can follow the
reasoning, alternative or opposing perspectives addressed, and the
organization. Intentionally utilize development, substance, and style
appropriate to purpose, audience, and situation.
EE.SL.11-12.4 Present an argument on a topic using an
organization appropriate to the purpose, audience, and task.
SL.11-12.5 Make strategic use of digital media (e.g., textual,
graphical, audio, visual, and interactive elements) in presentations
to enhance understanding of findings, reasoning, and evidence and
to add interest.
EE.SL.11-12.5 Use digital media strategically (e.g., textual, graphical,
audio, visual, and interactive elements) in presentations to support
understanding and add interest.
<<page 99>>
functions in different cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
comprehend more fully when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
for culture and context.
Knowledge of Language - Grades 11-12
L.11-12.1 Demonstrate an understanding of how language
functions in different cultures, contexts, and disciplines; apply this
knowledge to comprehend more fully when reading and listening,
and make effective choices when composing, creating, and speaking.
a. Recognize that standardized English is only one dialect of
many and has a specific history that is implicated in power
relationships.
b. Develop communicative competence by effectively
determining and appropriately responding to the language
demands of varied situations (i.e., effectively consider the
relationship between your intent as an author and the
context, purpose, genre, and audience needs when writing
and speaking).
c. Develop metacognitive awareness as writers and speakers,
justifying and evaluating the effectiveness and
appropriateness of language and genre choices.
d. Recognize standardized guidelines and style manuals exist
for various disciplines (e.g., MLA in English; APA in
education, science, and psychology); write and edit work so
that it conforms to the expectations of the discipline and
writing situation.
e. Apply an understanding of syntax to the study of complex
texts when reading; vary syntax for effect when writing.
<<page 126>>
EE.L.11-12.1 Use language to achieve desired outcomes when
communicating.
a. Notice that standardized English is only one dialect of many
and has a specific history that is implicated in power
relationships.
b. Notice the language demands of a writing/speaking
situation (i.e. formal, informal) and respond in an
appropriate way.
c. Continue to develop metacognitive awareness as writers
and speakers by explaining the reasons for language
choices.
d. Not applicable.
<<page 127>>
functions in different cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
comprehend more fully when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
for culture and context.
Vocabulary Acquisition & Use - Grades 11-12
L.11-12.2 Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and
multiple-meaning words and phrases in grade-level reading and
content; use context clues, analyze meaningful word parts, consult
general and specialized reference materials, and apply word solving
strategies (for meaning) as appropriate.
a. Determine the pronunciation, precise meaning, part of
speech, etymology and standardized usage of words; verify
by consulting general and specialized print and digital
reference materials as appropriate.
b. Determine and correctly use patterns of word changes that
indicate different meanings or parts of speech (e.g., analyze,
analysis, analytical; advocate, advocacy).
EE.L.11-12.2 Demonstrate knowledge of word meanings.
a. Use context to determine the meaning of unknown words.
b. Identify and use root words and the words that result when
affixes are added or removed.
c. Consult reference materials (dictionaries, online
vocabulary supports) to clarify the meaning of unfamiliar
words encountered when reading.
<<page 128>>
L.11-12.3 Demonstrate understanding of figurative language,
word relationships, and nuances in word meanings.
a. Determine the denotative, connotative, and figurative
meanings of words and phrases used in texts; analyze
nuances in the meaning of words with similar denotations.
b. Analyze the cumulative impact of specific word choices on
the meaning, tone, and effectiveness of a response;
consider words with multiple meanings, language that is
particularly engaging or beautiful, and reading, writing, and
speaking situations that seamlessly integrate linguistic
diversity, ideas, and cultures.
EE.L.11-12.3 Demonstrate understanding of word relationships and
use.
a. Interpret common figures of speech
b. Determine the intended meaning of multiple meaning
words.
L.11-12.4 Demonstrate an ability to collaboratively and
independently build vocabulary knowledge when encountering
unknown words including cultural, general academic, and discipline-
specific terms and phrases; make intentional vocabulary choices
appropriate to the context and situation.
EE.L.11-12.4 Use general academic and domain specific words and
phrases across contexts.
<<page 129>>
functions in different cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
comprehend more fully when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
for culture and context.
Conventions of Standard English - Grades 11-12
L.11-12.5 Demonstrate contextually appropriate use of the
conventions of standardized English grammar and usage when
writing or speaking. Discern when and where it is appropriate to use
standardized English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended purpose of language
choice.
a. Recognize that conventions (i.e., aspects of punctuation,
layout, and formatting within a particular genre) are the
result of agreed upon usage.
b. Identify ways in which usage and conventions vary and are
sometimes contested.
c. Resolve issues of complex or contested usage by consulting
appropriate references (e.g., Merriam-Webster's
Dictionary of English Usage, Dictionary of American
Regional English).
EE.L.11-12.5 Demonstrate standardized English grammar and
usage when communicating.
a. Use conventions of standard English when needed.
b. Not applicable.
c. Use digital, electronic, and other resources and tools to
improve uses of language as needed.
<<page 130>>
L.11-12.6 Demonstrate contextually appropriate use of the
conventions of standardized English capitalization, punctuation, and
spelling when writing. Discern when and where it is appropriate to
use standardized English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended purpose in conventions.
a. Use sophisticated punctuation and capitalization
techniques as appropriate to situation and genre (e.g.,
brackets and italics in research; capitalization expressing
extended meaning in poetry).
b. Spell correctly.
EE.L.11-12.6 Demonstrate understanding of conventions of
standardized English.
a. Demonstrate conventions of standard English including
capitalization, ending punctuation, and spelling when
writing.
b. Spell most single-syllable words correctly and apply
knowledge of word chunks in spelling longer words.
<<page 131>>