including texts that reflect one’s experiences and
Key Ideas & Details - Grade 6
R.6.1 Cite textual evidence to support an
analysis of what the text says explicitly or
implicitly and make logical inferences.
(RI&RL)
EE.R.6.1 Determine what a text says
explicitly as well as what simple inferences
should be drawn. (RI&RL)
R.6.2 Summarize texts, from a variety of
genres, to determine a theme or central idea
and how it is developed by key supporting
details over the course of a text. (RI &RL)
EE.R.6.2 Determine details in a text that
are related to the theme or main
idea. (RI&RL)
R.6.3 In literary texts, describe how
events unfold, as well as how characters
respond or change as the plot moves toward
a resolution. (RL)
In informational texts, analyze how
individuals, events, and ideas are introduced,
related to each other, and developed. (RI)
EE.R.6.3 In literary texts, identify how a
character responds to a challenge in a
text. (RL)
<<page 43>>
In informational texts, identify a detail that
elaborates upon individuals, events, or ideas
introduced in a text. (RI)
<<page 44>>
including texts that reflect one’s experiences and
Craft & Structure - Grade 6
R.6.4 Determine the meaning of words
and phrases, including figurative and
connotative meanings. Analyze the impact of
specific word choices on meaning, tone, and
mood, including words with multiple
meanings within a text. (RI&RL)
EE.R.6.4 Determine how word choice
changes the meaning in a text. (RI&RL)
R.6.5 In literary texts, analyze how a
sentence, paragraph, stanza, chapter, scene,
or section fits into the overall structure and
how it contributes to the development of
theme, central idea, setting, or plot. (RL)
In informational texts, analyze how a
particular sentence, paragraph, chapter, or
section fits into the overall structure of a
text and how it contributes to the
development of theme or central ideas. (RI)
EE.R.6.5 Given guidance and support
determine the structure of a text (e.g., story,
poem, drama, argument, directions,
informational). (RI &RL)
R.6.6 In literary texts, identify possible
biases, the point of view, and explain how it
is developed and conveys meaning in diverse
texts. (RL)
In informational texts, explain how an
author’s geographic location, identity, or
<<page 45>>
culture affect perspective. Analyze how the
author distinguishes his or her position from
that of others. (RI)
EE.R.6.6 With guidance and support,
identify words or phrases in the text that
describe or show the narrator, speaker, or
author’s point of view. (RI&RL)
<<page 46>>
including texts that reflect one’s experiences and
Integration of Knowledge & Ideas -
Grade 6
R.6.7 Compare and contrast how
different formats, including print and digital
media, contribute to the understanding of a
subject. (RI&RL)
EE.R.6.7 Find similarities in information
presented in different media or formats as
well as in text. (RI&RL)
R.6.8 Trace and evaluate the
development of an argument and specific
claims in texts, distinguishing claims that are
supported by reasons and relevant evidence
from claims that are not. (RI)
EE.R.6.8 Distinguish claims in a text
supported by reason. (RI)
R.6.9 Evaluate the quality of texts. Make
connections to other texts, ideas, cultural
perspectives, identities, eras, and personal
experiences. (RI&RL)
EE.R.6.9 Compare and contrast how two
texts describe details and make connections
to other texts, ideas, cultural perspectives,
<<page 47>>
identities, eras, or personal
experiences. (RI&RL)
<<page 48>>
time frames (time for inquiry, reflection, and revision)
Text Types & Purposes - Grade 6
W.6.1 Compose reflective, formal, and
creative writing, which may happen
simultaneously or independently, for a
variety of high-stakes and low-stakes
purposes.
EE.W.6.1 With guidance and support, use
drawing, dictating, or writing to compose
writing for a variety of high-stakes and low-
stakes purposes.
W.6.2 Write text in a variety of modes.
a. Write arguments to support claims
with clear reasons, relevant
evidence, and literary theory.
b. Write informative texts to examine
a topic and convey ideas, concepts,
and information through the
selection, organization, and analysis
of relevant content.
c. Write narratives to develop real or
imagined experiences or events
using effective narrative
techniques, relevant descriptive
details, and well-structured event
sequences.
<<page 69>>
EE.W.6.2 With guidance and support, use
writing and/or dictation to write in a variety
of modes:
a. Write an argument with a clearly
stated claim about a topic and
include clear reasons to support
that claim.
b. Write informative texts which
introduce a topic and provide facts,
details, and/or multimedia content
to develop the topic.
c. Write narratives to convey events
and experiences, real or imagined.
d. Include dialogue, details regarding
what happened, and tell about the
events in the order in which they
occurred.
<<page 70>>
<<page 71>>
time frames (time for inquiry, reflection, and revision)
Text Types & Purposes - Grade 6
(cont.)
W.6.3 Create writing that utilizes:
a. Organization: Introduce a topic;
organize ideas, concepts, and
information. Provide a concluding
statement appropriate to the mode
of writing.
b. Transitions: Use appropriate
transitions to clarify the
relationships among ideas and
concepts.
c. Word Choice (including domain
specific): Use precise language and
domain-specific vocabulary to
inform about or explain the topic.
Use sensory language to describe
experiences and events.
EE.W.6.3 Use a combination of drawing,
dictating and writing to create a text
that includes an introduction, body, and
conclusion, uses words that convey specific
details, transitions to link and build
connections, and temporal words to signal
event order.
<<page 72>>
time frames (time for inquiry, reflection, and revision)
Production & Distribution of Writing -
Grade 6
W.6.4 Independently and collaboratively
produce clear and coherent writing in which
the development, organization, and style
are culturally-sustaining and rhetorically
authentic to task, purpose, and audience.
(Grade-specific expectations for writing
types are defined in standards 1–3 above.)
EE.W.6.4 Produce writing that is
appropriate for the task, purpose, or
audience.
W.6.5 With some guidance and support
from peers and adults, develop and
strengthen writing as needed by planning,
revising, editing, rewriting, or trying a new
approach.
EE.W.6.5 With guidance and support from
adults and peers, plan before writing and
produce writing focused on the planned
topic, and revise and edit their own writing,
dictation, or pictures.
W.6.6 Use technology, (including paper
and pencil, internet, audio, visual,
multilingual, multimodal, mobile, or other
interactive formats), to produce and publish
<<page 73>>
writing and present the relationships
between information and ideas efficiently,
as well as, to interact and collaborate with
others. Proficiently produce writing
through printing, cursive, or typing (with
sufficient command of keyboarding skills to
type a minimum of three pages in a single
sitting), selecting the method(s) best suited
for audience and purpose.
EE.W.6.6 Use digital tools, including the
Internet, to produce and publish writing
while interacting and collaborating with
others. Produce writing through printing,
cursive, and/or typing.
<<page 74>>
time frames (time for inquiry, reflection, and revision)
Inquiry to Build & Present Knowledge
- Grade 6
W.6.7 Conduct short inquiry projects to
answer a question, drawing on several
sources and refocusing the inquiry when
appropriate.
EE W.6.7 With guidance and support,
conduct short inquiry projects to answer a
question.
W.6.8 Gather relevant information from
multiple print and digital sources, assess the
credibility of each source, quote or
paraphrase the data and conclusions of
others while avoiding plagiarism and
providing basic bibliographic information
for sources.
EE.W.6.8 Gather information about a
given topic from multiple print or digital
sources.
W.6.9 Draw evidence from literary or
informational texts to support analysis,
reflection, and inquiry. (Apply grade 6
Reading standards)
<<page 75>>
EE.W.6.9 With guidance and support from
adults, draw evidence from literary or
informational texts to support reflection or
inquiry questions based on a reading of a
literary or informational text.
<<page 76>>
goals. Be able to justify intentional language choices
Comprehension & Collaboration -
Grade 6
SL.6.1 Engage effectively in a range of
collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in
groups, and teacher-led) with diverse
partners on topics, texts, and issues, building
on others' ideas and expressing one’s
thinking clearly.
a. Come to discussions prepared and
explicitly draw on that preparation
by referring to evidence on the
topic, text, or issue. Support analysis
by making connections,
paraphrasing, clarifying, or
explaining the evidence.
b. With guidance and support, set
specific norms and goals for collegial
discussions (e.g., gaining attention in
respectful ways, actively listening,
speaking one at a time about the
topics and texts under discussion).
c. Pose and respond to specific
questions with elaboration and
detail by making comments that
contribute to the topic, text, or issue
under discussion.
Continues on next page.
<<page 93>>
goals. Be able to justify intentional language choices
Comprehension & Collaboration -
Grade 6 (cont.)
d. Review the key ideas expressed and
demonstrate an understanding of
multiple perspectives through
reflection and paraphrasing.
EE.SL.6.1 Engage in collaborative
discussions.
a. Come to discussions prepared to
share information, with evidence.
b. With guidance and support from
adults and peers, follow simple,
agreed-upon norms for discussions
and contribute information.
c. Ask and answer questions specific
to the topic, text, or issue under
discussion.
d. Restate key ideas expressed in the
discussion
SL.6.2 Interpret information presented in
diverse media and formats and explain how
it contributes to a topic, text, or issue under
study.
<<page 94>>
EE.SL.6.2 Identify information presented in
diverse media and formats (e.g., visually,
quantitatively, orally) that relates to a topic,
text, or issue under study.
SL.6.3 Understand and evaluate a
speaker’s argument and specific claims,
distinguishing claims that are supported by
reasons and evidence from claims that are
not.
EE.SL.6.3 Identify the reasons and evidence
supporting the claims made by the speaker.
<<page 95>>
goals. Be able to justify intentional language choices
Presentation of Knowledge & Ideas -
Grade 6
SL.6.4 Present claims and findings in a
logical order using relevant evidence and
details to highlight main ideas or themes.
Communicate clearly and in an engaging
manner, considering the audience, purpose,
and situation. Explain purpose of language
choices.
EE.SL.6.4 Clearly present findings on a
topic including descriptions, facts, or details,
considering the audience.
SL.6.5 Include multimedia components and
visual displays in presentations to clarify and
enhance information.
EE.SL.6.5 Select an auditory, visual, or
tactual display to clarify the information in
presentations.
<<page 96>>
communicative goals when composing, creating,
language and convention choices and explain how
Knowledge of Language - Grade 6
L.6.1 Demonstrate an understanding of
how language functions in different cultures,
contexts, and disciplines; apply this
knowledge to comprehend more fully when
reading and listening, and make effective
choices when composing, creating, and
speaking.
a. Recognize that standardized English
is only one dialect of many and has a
specific history that is implicated in
power relationships.
b. Determine the language demands of
a writing or speaking situation,
respond in appropriate ways (e.g.,
precise and concise language,
extended and descriptive language,
incorporation of code-meshing,
etc.).
c. Expand, combine, and reduce
sentences for meaning, reader or
listener interest, and style.
d. Maintain consistency in style and
tone.
<<page 119>>
EE.L.6.1 Use language to achieve desired
outcomes when communicating.
a. Notice that standardized English is
only one dialect of many and has a
specific history.
b. Notice the language demands of a
writing/speaking situation (i.e.
formal, informal) and respond in an
appropriate way.
c. Expand or combine sentences for
meaning, interest, and style.
d. Maintain consistency in use of
language.
<<page 120>>
communicative goals when composing, creating,
language and convention choices and explain how
Vocabulary Acquisition & Use -
Grade 6
L.6.2 Determine or clarify the meaning of
unknown and multiple-meaning words and
phrases in grade-level reading and content;
use context clues, analyze meaningful word
parts, consult general and specialized
reference materials, and apply word solving
strategies (for meaning) as appropriate.
a. Verify the preliminary
determination of the meaning of a
word or phrase (e.g., by checking the
inferred meaning in context or in a
dictionary).
b. Use grade-appropriate Greek or
Latin affixes and roots as clues to
the meaning of a word.
EE.L.6.2 Demonstrate knowledge of word
meanings.
a. Use context to determine which
word is missing from a content area
text.
b. Use frequently occurring root
words (e.g., like) and the words that
result when affixes are added (e.g.,
liked, disliked, liking).
c. Seek clarification and meaning
support when unfamiliar words are
encountered while reading or
communicating.
<<page 121>>
communicative goals when composing, creating,
language and convention choices and explain how
Vocabulary Acquisition & Use -
Grade 6 (cont.)
L.6.3 Demonstrate understanding of
figurative language, word relationships, and
nuances in word meanings.
a. Determine the denotative,
connotative, and figurative
meanings of words and phrases
used in texts; when words have
similar denotations, be able to
describe differences in connotation
and their impact on meaning and
tone.
b. Interpret figures of speech (e.g.,
personification) in context.
c. Use the relationship between
particular words (e.g., cause and
effect) to better understand each of
the words.
d. Distinguish between words with
similar definitions (e.g., stingy,
scrimping, economical, unwasteful,
thrifty).
<<page 122>>
EE.L.6.3 Demonstrate understanding of
word relationships and use.
a. Determine the meaning of words in
a text, distinguish between literal
and non-literal language.
b. Identify the meaning of simple
similes (e.g., The man was as big as a
tree.).
c. Not applicable
d. Demonstrate understanding of
words by identifying other words
with similar and different meanings
L.6.4 Demonstrate an ability to
collaboratively and independently build
vocabulary knowledge when encountering
unknown words including cultural, general
academic, and discipline-specific terms and
phrases; make intentional vocabulary
choices appropriate to the context and
situation.
EE.L.6.4 Use general academic and domain-
specific words and phrases across contexts.
<<page 123>>
communicative goals when composing, creating,
language and convention choices and explain how
Conventions of Standardized English -
Grade 6
L.6.5 Demonstrate contextually
appropriate use of the conventions of
standardized English grammar and usage
when writing or speaking. Discern when and
where it is appropriate to use standardized
English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended
purpose of language choice with:
a. use of objective, subjective,
possessive, and intensive pronouns;
and
b. strategies to improve expression in
conventional language.
EE.L.6.5 Demonstrate standardized English
grammar and usage when communicating.
a. Use personal pronouns (e.g., he, she,
they) per the preference of the
subject.
b. Use indefinite pronouns.
<<page 124>>
L.6.6 Demonstrate contextually
appropriate use of the conventions of
standardized English capitalization,
punctuation, and spelling when writing.
Discern when and where it is appropriate to
use standardized English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended
purpose in conventions with:
a. commas, parentheses, and dashes,
and
b. correct spelling.
EE.L.6.6 Demonstrate understanding of
conventions of standardized English.
a. Use question marks at the end of
written questions.
b. Spell untaught words phonetically,
drawing on letter-sound
relationships and common spelling
patterns.
<<page 125>>