texts for many purposes (including enjoyment),
and proficiently understanding grade-level text.
Key Ideas & Details - Grade 8
R.8.1 Cite textual evidence that strongly
supports an analysis of what the text says
explicitly or implicitly and make logical
inferences. (RI&RL)
EE.R.8.1 Cite text to support inferences
from text. (RI&RL)
R.8.2 Summarize texts, from a variety of
genres, to determine one or more themes or
central ideas and analyze their development
over the course of the text. (RI&RL)
EE.R.8.2 Summarize a familiar text and
determine details related to the theme or
main idea. (RI&RL)
R.8.3 In literary texts, analyze how
particular lines of dialogue or events propel
the action, reveal aspects of a character, or
provoke a decision. (RL)
In informational texts, analyze how
individuals, events, and ideas are introduced,
related to each other, and developed. (RI)
EE.R.8.3 In literary texts, identify which
incidents in a text lead to subsequent action.
(RL) In informational texts, identify how two
<<page 43>>
or more individuals, events, or ideas are
related. (RI)
<<page 44>>
texts for many purposes (including enjoyment),
and proficiently understanding grade-level text.
Craft & Structure - Grade 8
R.8.4 Determine the meaning of words
and phrases, including figurative and
connotative meanings. Analyze the impact of
specific word choices on meaning, tone, and
mood, including words with multiple
meanings within a text. (RI&RL)
EE.R.8.4 Determine the connotative
meanings of words and phrases in a
text. (RI&RL)
R.8.5 In literary and informational texts,
compare and contrast the structures of two
or more texts in order to analyze how the
differing structure of each text contributes
to overall meaning, style, theme, or central
idea. (RI&RL)
EE.R.8.5 Compare and contrast the
structure of two or more texts (RL and RI)
and use important details to identify the
main idea in an informational text.
R.8.6 In literary texts, analyze how the
differences between the point of view,
perspectives, and possible biases of the
characters, the audience, or reader create
effects such as mood and tone. (RL)
<<page 45>>
In informational texts, explain how an
author’s geographic location, identity, or
culture affect perspective. Analyze how the
author addresses conflicting evidence or
viewpoints. (RI)
EE.R.8.6
Determine the narrator, speaker, or author’s
point of view and how it differs from the
audience or reader. (RI&RL)
<<page 46>>
texts for many purposes (including enjoyment),
and proficiently understanding grade-level text.
Integration of Knowledge & Ideas -
Grade 8
R.8.7 Evaluate the advantages and
disadvantages of using different media—
print, audio, video, stage, or digital—to
present a particular subject or idea and
analyze the extent to which a production
remains faithful to or departs from the
written text. (RI&RL)
EE.R.8.7 Compare and contrast a text
version of a story, drama, or poem with an
audio, video, or live version of the same
text. (RI&RL)
R.8.8 Trace and evaluate an argument and
specific claims in a text. Assess whether the
reasoning is valid and the evidence is
relevant and sufficient. Recognize when
irrelevant evidence is introduced. (RI)
EE.R.8.8 Determine the argument made by
an author in a text. (RI)
R.8.9 Choose and develop criteria to
evaluate the quality of texts. Make
connections to other texts, ideas, cultural
perspectives, identities, eras, and personal
experiences. (RI&RL)
EE.R.8.9 Compare and contrast themes,
patterns of events, or characters across two
<<page 47>>
or more texts and make connections to
other texts, ideas, cultural perspectives,
identities, eras, or personal
experiences. (RI&RL)
<<page 48>>
tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
Text Types & Purposes - Grade 8
W.8.1 Compose reflective, formal, and
creative writing, which may happen
simultaneously or independently, for a
variety of high-stakes and low-stakes
purposes.
EE.W.8.1 With guidance and support, use
drawing, dictating, or writing to compose
writing for a variety of high-stakes and low-
stakes purposes.
W.8.2 Write text in a variety of modes.
a. Write arguments to introduce and
support claim(s) using logical
reasoning, relevant evidence, and
literary theory. Use accurate,
credible sources and demonstrate
an understanding of the topic or
text, acknowledge and distinguish
the claim(s) from alternate or
opposing claims, and organize the
reasons and evidence logically.
Write informative or explanatory b.
text, examine a topic and convey
ideas, concepts, and information
through the selection, organization,
and analysis of relevant content by
introducing and developing a topic
with relevant, well-chosen facts,
definitions, concrete details,
<<page 69>>
quotations, or other information
and examples, organizing ideas,
concepts, and information into
broader categories; include
formatting (e.g., headings), graphics
(e.g., charts, tables), and multimedia
when useful to aiding
comprehension.
Write narratives that develop real or
imagined experiences or events using
relevant descriptive details, and well-
structured event sequences that organize
an event sequence logically. Engage and
orient the reader by establishing a context
and point of view and introduce a narrator
or characters using techniques, such as
dialogue, pacing, description, and reflection,
to develop experiences, events, and
characters.
EE.W.8.2 With guidance and support, use
writing and/or dictation to write in a
variety of modes:
a. Write an argument with a clearly
stated claim about a topic and
include clear reasons to support
that claim. Organize reasons
logically.
b. Write informative texts which
introduce a topic and provide well
chosen facts, details, and/or
multimedia content to develop the
topic. Provide a concluding
statement.
c. Write narratives to convey events
and experiences, real or imagined.
Include dialogue, details, character
descriptions, and tell about the
events in the order in which they
occurred.
<<page 70>>
<<page 71>>
tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
Text Types & Purposes -Grade 8 (cont.)
W.8.3 Create writing that utilizes:
a. Organization: Provide an
introduction that creates suspense
and anticipation for the reader.
Structure of the text supports and
clarifies the purpose and topic
throughout the entire text.
Conclusion statement provides
closure and ties up all loose ends.
b. Transitions: Vary transitions to
create cohesion and clarity among
ideas and concepts.
c. Word Choice (including domain
specific): Use genre-specific
vocabulary. Use vocabulary that
enhances the meaning and engages
the reader.
EE.W.8.3 Use a combination of drawing,
dictating and writing to create a text
that includes an introduction, body, and
conclusion, uses words that convey specific
details, transitions to link and build
connections, and temporal words to signal
event order.
<<page 72>>
tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
Production & Distribution of Writing -
Grade 8
W.8.4 Independently and collaboratively
produce clear and coherent writing in which
the development, organization, and style
are culturally-sustaining and rhetorically
authentic to task, purpose, and audience.
(Grade-specific expectations for writing
types are defined in standards 1–3 above.)
EE.W.8.4 Independently and
collaboratively produce writing that is
appropriate for the task, purpose, or
audience.
W.8.5 With some guidance and support
from peers and adults, develop and
strengthen writing as needed by planning,
revising, editing, rewriting, or trying a new
approach, focusing on how well purpose and
audience have been addressed.
EE.W.8.5 With guidance and support from
adults and peers, plan before writing and
produce writing focused on the planned
topic, and revise and edit their own writing,
dictation, or pictures.
W.8.6 Use technology, (including paper
and pencil, internet, audio, visual,
multilingual, multimodal, mobile, or other
interactive formats), to produce and publish
<<page 73>>
writing and present the relationships
between information and ideas efficiently
as well as to interact and collaborate with
others.
EE.W.8.6 Use technology,(including paper
and pencil, internet, audio, visual, and/or
other interactive formats) to produce
writing to interact and collaborate with
others. Produce writing through printing,
cursive, and/or typing.
<<page 74>>
tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
Inquiry to Build & Present Knowledge
- Grade 8
W.8.7 Conduct short inquiry projects to
answer a question (including self-generated
questions), drawing on several sources and
generating additional related, focused
questions that allow for multiple avenues of
exploration.
EE.W.8.7 With guidance and support,
conduct short inquiry projects to answer a
question and generate additional questions
for further research.
W.8.8 Gather relevant information from
multiple print and digital sources using
search terms effectively, assess the
credibility and accuracy of each source,
quote or paraphrase the data and
conclusions of others while avoiding
plagiarism and following a standard format
for citation.
EE.W.8.8 Select quotes providing relevant
information about a topic from multiple
print or digital sources.
W.8.9 Draw evidence from literary or
informational texts to support analysis,
reflection, and inquiry. (Apply grade 8
Reading standards)
<<page 75>>
EE.W.8.9 With guidance and support from
adults, draw evidence from literary or
informational texts to support reflection or
inquiry questions based on a reading of a
literary or informational text.
<<page 76>>
and situations in order to meet communicative
and context.
Comprehension & Collaboration -
Grade 8
SL.8.1 Engage effectively in a range of
collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in
groups, and teacher-led) with diverse
partners on topics, texts, and issues, building
on others' ideas and expressing one’s
thinking clearly.
a. Come to discussions prepared, and
explicitly draw on that preparation
by referring to evidence on the
topic, text, or issue. Support analysis
by making connections,
paraphrasing, clarifying, or
explaining the evidence.
b. Set and track specific norms and
goals for collegial discussions (e.g.,
gaining attention in respectful ways,
actively listening, speaking one at a
time about the topics and texts
under discussion), and monitor
progress toward goals.
c. Pose questions that connect the
ideas of several speakers and
respond to others' questions and
comments with relevant evidence,
observations, and ideas. Promote
multiple perspectives.
<<page 93>>
and situations in order to meet communicative
and context.
Comprehension & Collaboration -
Grade 8 (cont.)
d. Evaluate new information
expressed by others and, when
warranted, qualify or justify one’s
own views in light of the evidence
presented.
EE.SL.8.1 Engage in collaborative
discussions.
a. Come to discussions prepared to
share information previously
studied, with evidence.
b. Follow simple norms during
discussions.
c. Remain on the topic of the
discussion when asking or
answering questions or making
other contributions to a discussion.
d. Acknowledge new information and
multiple perspectives expressed by
others in a discussion and relate it to
personal ideas.
SL.8.2 Analyze the purpose of information
presented in diverse media and formats and
evaluate the motives (e.g., social,
commercial, political) behind its
presentation.
<<page 94>>
EE.SL.8.2 Determine the purpose of
information presented in graphic, oral,
visual, or multimodal formats.
SL.8.3 Understand and evaluate a
speaker’s argument and specific claims,
evaluating the soundness of the reasoning
and relevance and sufficiency of the
evidence and identifying when irrelevant
evidence is introduced.
EE.SL.8.3 Determine the argument made by
a speaker on a topic.
<<page 95>>
and situations in order to meet communicative
and context.
Presentation of Knowledge & Ideas -
Grade 8
SL.8.4 Present claims and findings,
emphasizing significant points in a focused,
coherent manner with relevant evidence,
sound valid reasoning, and well-chosen
details. Communicate clearly and in an
engaging manner, considering the audience,
purpose, and situation. Explain purpose of
language choices.
EE.SL.8.4 Clearly present descriptions,
facts, or details supporting specific points
made on a topic, considering the audience.
SL.8.5 Integrate multimedia and visual
displays into presentations to clarify
information, strengthen claims and
evidence, and add interest.
EE.SL.8.5 Include multimedia and visual
information into presentations.
<<page 96>>
cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
Knowledge of Language - Grade 8
L.8.1 Demonstrate an understanding of
how language functions in different cultures,
contexts, and disciplines; apply this
knowledge to comprehend more fully when
reading and listening, and make effective
choices when composing, creating, and
speaking.
a. Recognize that standardized English
is only one dialect of many and has a
specific history that is implicated in
power relationships.
b. Determine the language demands of
a writing or speaking situation;
respond in appropriate ways (e.g.,
precise and concise language,
extended and descriptive language,
incorporation of code-meshing,
etc.).
c. Use verbs in the active and passive
voice and in the conditional and
subjunctive mood to achieve
particular effects (e.g., emphasizing
the actor or the action, expressing
uncertainty, or describing a state
contrary to fact).
d. Begin to develop metacognitive
awareness as writers and speakers
by explaining the reasons for
language choices.
<<page 119>>
EE.L.8.1 Use language to achieve desired
outcomes when communicating.
a. Notice that standardized English is
only one dialect of many and has a
specific history that is implicated in
power relationships.
b. Notice the language demands of a
writing/speaking situation (i.e.
formal, informal) and respond in an
appropriate way.
c. Use to-be verbs (am, are, is, was,
were, be, become, became)
accurately when writing and
communicating.
d. Begin to develop metacognitive
awareness as writers and speakers
by explaining the reasons for
language choices.
<<page 120>>
cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
Vocabulary Acquisition & Use -
Grade 8
L.8.2 Determine or clarify the meaning of
unknown and multiple-meaning words or
phrases in grade-level reading and content;
use context clues, analyze meaningful word
parts, consult general and specialized
reference materials, and apply word solving
strategies (for meaning) as appropriate
a. Verify the preliminary
determination of the meaning of a
word or phrase (e.g., by checking the
inferred meaning in context or in a
dictionary).
b. Use grade-appropriate Greek or
Latin affixes and roots as clues to
the meaning of a word.
E.L.8.2 Demonstrate knowledge of word
meanings.
a. Use context to determine which
word is missing from a content area
text.
b. Use frequently occurring root
words (e.g., like) and the words that
result when affixes are added (e.g.,
liked, disliked, liking).
c. Seek clarification and meaning
support when unfamiliar words are
encountered while reading or
communicating.
<<page 121>>
cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
Vocabulary Acquisition & Use -
Grade 8 (cont.)
L.8.3 Demonstrate understanding of
figurative language, word relationships, and
nuances in word meanings.
Determine the denotative, connotative, and
figurative meanings of words and phrases
used in texts; when words have similar
denotations, be able to describe differences
in connotation and their impact on meaning
and tone.
Analyze the impact of specific word choice
on meaning and tone, including analogies or
allusions to other texts.
<<page 122>>
EE.L.8.3 Demonstrate understanding of
word relationships and use.
a. Identify the literal and nonliteral
meanings of words in context.
b. Use descriptive words to add
meaning when writing and
communicating.
L.8.4 Demonstrate an ability to
collaboratively and independently build
vocabulary knowledge when encountering
unknown words including cultural, general
academic, and discipline-specific terms and
phrases; make intentional vocabulary
choices appropriate to the context and
situation.
EE.L.8.4 Use general academic and domain-
specific words and phrases across contexts.
<<page 123>>
cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
Conventions of Standardized English -
Grade 8
L.8.5 Demonstrate contextually
appropriate use of the conventions of
standardized English grammar and usage
when writing or speaking. Discern when and
where it is appropriate to use standardized
English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended
purpose of language choice with:
a. active and passive voice verbs;
b. indicative, imperative, interrogative,
conditional, and subjunctive mood
verbs; and
c. recognizing and correcting shifts in
verb voice and mood.
EE.L.8.5 Demonstrate standardized English
grammar and usage when communicating.
a. Use appropriate verbs to match
nouns.
b. Form and use the simple verb tenses
(e.g., I walked, I walk, I will walk).
c. Not applicable
<<page 124>>
L.8.6 Demonstrate contextually
appropriate use of the conventions of
standardized English capitalization,
punctuation, and spelling when writing.
Discern when and where it is appropriate to
use standardized English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended
purpose in conventions with:
a. punctuation to recognize a pause or
break,
b. ellipsis to indicate an omission, and
c. correct spelling.
EE.L.8.6 Demonstrate understanding of
conventions of standardized English.
a. Use end punctuation and
capitalization when writing a
sentence or question.
b. Not applicable
c. Spell words phonetically, drawing
on knowledge of letter- sound
relationships and/or common
spelling patterns.
<<page 125>>