including texts that reflect one’s experiences and experiences of others.
Key Ideas & Details - Grades 9 - 10
R.9-10.1 Cite relevant textual evidence that strongly supports
analysis of what the text says explicitly or implicitly and make
logical inferences; develop questions for further exploration.
(RI&RL)
EE.R.9-10.1 Determine which citations demonstrate what the text
says explicitly as well as inferentially. (RI&RL)
R.9-10.2 Objectively and accurately summarize texts, from a
variety of genres, to determine one or more themes or central ideas
and analyze its development, including how it emerges and is
shaped and refined by specific details. (RI&RL)
EE.R.9-10.2 Given the theme or central idea, recount related
events and details (including character and setting details for
literary texts). (RI&RL)
R.9-10.3 In literary texts, analyze how complex and/or dynamic
characters develop, interact with other characters, advance the
plot, or develop a theme. (RL)
In informational texts, analyze how the author unfolds an analysis or
argument, including the sequence, the introduction and
development of ideas, and the connections that exist. (RI)
EE.R.9-10.3 Determine logical connections between characters,
individuals, ideas, or events in a text. (RI&RL)
<<page 49>>
including texts that reflect one’s experiences and experiences of others.
Craft & Structure - Grades 9 - 10
R.9-10.4 Determine the meaning of words and phrases, including
figurative and connotative meanings. Analyze the impact of specific
word choices on meaning, tone, and mood. Examine technical or key
terms and how language differs across genres. (RI&RL)
EE.R.9-10.4 Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they
are used in text, including common idioms, analogies, and figures of
speech. (RI&RL)
R.9-10.5 In literary texts, consider how varied aspects of
structure create meaning and affect the reader. (RL)
In informational texts, consider how the author's intent influences
particular sentences, paragraphs, or sections. (RI)
EE.R.9-10.5 Identify where a text deviates from a chronological
presentation of events (RL) and locate sentences that support an
author’s central idea or claim (RI).
R.9-10.6 Analyze how authors employ point of view, perspective,
and purpose to shape explicit and implicit messages (e.g., examine
rhetorical strategies, literary elements, and devices). Explain how an
author’s geographic location, identity, and culture affect
perspective. (RI&RL)
EE.R.9-10.6 Determine author’s point of view and compare with
own point of view. (RI&RL)
<<page 50>>
including texts that reflect one’s experiences and experiences of others.
Integration of Knowledge & Ideas - Grades 9 - 10
R.9-10.7 Analyze how a subject or content is presented in two or
more formats by determining which details are emphasized, altered,
or absent in each account (e.g., analyze the representation of a
subject and/or content or key scene in two different formats).
(RI&RL)
EE.R.9-10.7 Compare and contrast the representation of a subject
or topic in two different formats. (RI&RL)
R.9-10.8 Delineate and evaluate an argument and specific claims
in a text, assessing the validity or fallacy of key statements by
examining whether the supporting evidence is relevant and
sufficient. (RI)
EE.R.9-10.8 Determine how the specific claims support the
argument made in a text. (RI)
R.9-10.9 Choose and develop criteria to evaluate the quality of
texts. Make connections to other texts, ideas, cultural perspectives,
identities, eras, and personal experiences. (RI&RL)
EE.R.9-10.9 Make informed judgements about text; make
connections to other texts, ideas, cultural perspectives, identities,
eras, and personal events or situations. (RI&RL)
<<page 51>>
<<page 52>>
time frames (time for inquiry, reflection, and revision) and shorter time
Text Types & Purposes - Grades 9-10
W.9-10.1 Compose reflective, formal, and creative writing,
which may happen simultaneously or independently, for a variety
of high-stakes and low-stakes purposes.
EE.W.9-10.1 With guidance and support as needed, use dictating,
or writing to compose writing for a variety of high-stakes and low-
stakes purposes.
W.9-10.2 Write text in a variety of modes.
a. Write arguments and literary analysis to support claims in
an analysis of substantive topics or texts, using valid
reasoning, literary theory, and relevant and sufficient
evidence that introduce precise claim(s); distinguish the
claim(s) from alternate or opposing claims; and create an
organization that establishes clear relationships among
claim(s), counterclaims, reasons, and evidence. Develop
claim(s) and counterclaims fairly, supplying evidence for
each while pointing out the strengths and limitations of
both in a manner that anticipates the audience's
knowledge level and concerns.
b. Write informative texts that examine and convey complex
ideas, concepts, and information clearly and accurately
through the effective selection, organization, and analysis
of content by introducing a topic; organizing complex
ideas, concepts, and information to make important
connections and distinctions; including formatting (e.g.,
headings), graphics (e.g., figures, tables), and multimedia
when useful to aiding comprehension; developing the topic
with well-chosen, relevant, and sufficient facts, extended
definitions, concrete details, quotations, and other
<<page 77>>
information and examples appropriate to the audience's
knowledge of the topic.
c. Write narratives that develop real or imagined experiences
or events using relevant descriptive details and well-
structured event sequences that organize an event
sequence logically. Engages and orients the reader by
establishing a context and point of view and introducing a
narrator or characters using techniques, such as dialogue,
pacing, description, and reflection to develop experiences,
events, or characters.
EE.W.9-10.2 With guidance and support, use writing and/or
dictation to write in a variety of modes:
a. Write an argument or literary analysis with a clearly stated
claim and valid reasons to support the claim. Organize
reasons logically and develop the claim fairly.
b. Write informative texts which introduce a topic and
provide well chosen facts, details, and/or multimedia
content to develop the topic and convey information
clearly and accurately. Provide a concluding statement.
c. Write narratives to convey events and experiences, real or
imagined. Include dialogue, relevant details, character
descriptions, and tell about the events and in a logical
sequence.
<<page 78>>
time frames (time for inquiry, reflection, and revision) and shorter time
Text Types & Purposes - Grades 9-10 (cont.)
W.9-10.3 Create writing that utilizes:
a. Organization: Introduce a topic; organize complex ideas,
concepts, analysis, information, and claims to make
important connections and distinctions. Establish and
maintain a structure and conventions consistent with the
mode of writing. Provide a concluding statement or section
that follows from and supports the topic, themes, and
experiences presented in the text.
b. Transitions: Use appropriate and varied transitions to link
the major sections of the text, create cohesion, and clarify
the relationships among complex ideas and concepts.
c. Word Choice (including domain specific): Use culturally-
sustaining language and domain-specific vocabulary to
manage the complexity of the topic. Use telling details and
sensory language to convey a vivid picture of thoughts,
ideas, and experiences.
EE.W.9-10.3 Use a combination of drawing, dictating and writing
to create a text that includes an introduction, body, and conclusion,
uses words that convey specific details, transitions to link and build
connections, and temporal words to signal event order.
<<page 79>>
time frames (time for inquiry, reflection, and revision) and shorter time
Production & Distribution of Writing - Grades 9-10
W.9-10.4 Produce clear and coherent writing in which the
development, organization, and style are culturally-sustaining and
rhetorically authentic to task, purpose, and audience. (Grade-specific
expectations for writing types are defined in standards 1-3 above.)
EE.W.9-10.4 Produce writing that is appropriate for the task,
purpose, and audience.
W.9-10.5 Develop and strengthen writing (collaboratively and
individually) as needed by planning, revising, editing, rewriting, or
trying a new approach, focusing on addressing what is most
significant for a specific purpose and audience.
EE.W.9-10.5 With guidance and support from adults and peers as
needed, plan before writing, produce writing for a specific purpose
and focused on a planned topic, and revise and edit their own writing,
dictation, or pictures.
W.9-10.6 Make informed and intentional decisions about
technology use (including paper and pencil, internet, audio, visual,
multilingual, multimodal, mobile, or other interactive formats) to
engage in authentic rhetorical tasks for specific purposes and
audiences. Such decisions include assessing particular technologies’
affordances for:
a. connecting writers and readers,
b. producing accessible experiences for specific audiences, and
c. dynamically and flexibly matching modes with ideas to
communicate with readers.
<<page 80>>
EE.W.9-10.6 Make intentional decisions about technology use
(including paper and pencil, internet, audio, visual, and/or other
interactive formats) to produce, publish, and update individual or
shared writing products. Proficiently produce writing through
printing, cursive, and/or typing.
<<page 81>>
time frames (time for inquiry, reflection, and revision) and shorter time
Inquiry to Build & Present Knowledge - Grades 9-10
W.9-10.7 Conduct short as well as more sustained research
projects to answer a question (including a self-generated question)
or solve a problem that is rhetorically authentic and culturally-
sustaining; narrow or broaden the inquiry when appropriate;
synthesize multiple sources on the subject, demonstrating an
understanding of the subject under investigation.
EE.W.9-10.7 With guidance and support as needed, conduct
inquiry projects to answer a question or solve a problem.
W.9-10.8 Gather relevant information from multiple
authoritative print and digital, academic, and popular sources, using
advanced searches effectively; assess the usefulness of each source
in answering the research question; integrate information into the
text to maintain the flow of ideas, avoiding plagiarism and following
a standard format for citation.
EE.W.9-10.8 Write answers to research questions by selecting
relevant information from multiple resources.
W.9.10.9 Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to
support analysis, reflection, and research. (Apply grades 9-10
Reading standards)
EE.W.9-10.9 With guidance and support from adults, draw
evidence from literary or informational texts to support reflection,
analysis or inquiry questions based on a reading of a literary or
informational text.
<<page 82>>
<<page 83>>
goals. Be able to justify intentional language choices and how those choices
Comprehension & Collaboration - Grades 9-10
SL.9-10.1 Initiate and participate effectively in a range of
collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in groups, and teacher-led)
with diverse partners on topics, texts, and issues, listening actively,
and building on others' ideas and expressing their own clearly.
a. Come to discussions prepared, explicitly draw on that
preparation by referring to evidence from texts and other
research on the topic, text, or issue. Support analysis by
making connections, paraphrasing, clarifying, or explaining
the evidence.
b. Work with peers to set norms for collegial discussions,
decision making (e.g., informal consensus, taking votes on
key issues, presentation of alternate views) and clear goals
as needed. Reflect on progress as an individual and as a
group.
c. Propel conversations by posing and engaging with
questions that relate the current discussion to broader
themes or larger ideas; actively incorporate others into the
discussion; and clarify, verify, or challenge ideas and
conclusions. Promote multiple and divergent perspectives.
d. Engage thoughtfully with diverse perspectives, summarize
points of agreement and disagreement, and, when
warranted, qualify or justify their own views and
understanding and make new connections in light of the
evidence and reasoning presented.
EE.SL.9-10.1 Engage in collaborative discussions.
a. Prepare evidence for discussions by collecting information
on the topic and be able to explain it.
b. Work with adults and peers to set norms for discussions,
and reflect on the conversation.
<<page 97>>
c. Relate the topic of discussion to broader themes or ideas
and acknowledge other perspectives.
d. Indicate agreement or disagreement with others during
discussions.
SL.9-10.2 Analyze and synthesize multiple sources of
information presented in diverse media or formats to determine
credibility and accuracy of each source.
EE.SL.9-10.2 Determine the credibility of information presented
in diverse media or formats.
SL.9-10.3 Understand and evaluate a speaker’s point of view,
reasoning, and use of evidence and rhetoric, identifying any
fallacious reasoning or exaggerated or distorted evidence.
EE.SL.9-10.3 Determine the speaker's point of view on a topic.
<<page 98>>
goals. Be able to justify intentional language choices and how those choices
Presentation of Knowledge & Ideas - Grades 9-10
SL.9-10.4 Present information, findings, and supporting evidence
such that listeners can follow the reasoning and organization.
Intentionally utilize development, substance, and style appropriate
to purpose, audience, and situation.
EE.SL.9-10.4 Present an argument on a topic with logically
organized claims, reasons, and evidence.
SL.9-10.5 Make strategic use of digital media (e.g., textual,
graphical, audio, visual, and interactive elements) in presentations
to enhance understanding of findings, reasoning, and evidence and
to add interest.
EE.SL.9-10.5 Use digital media (e.g., textual, graphical, audio, visual,
and interactive elements) in presentations to support
understanding.
<<page 99>>
communicative goals when composing, creating, and speaking, and to
language and convention choices and explain how those choices differ
Knowledge of Language - Grades 9-10
L.9-10.1 Demonstrate an understanding of how language
functions in different cultures, contexts, and disciplines; apply this
knowledge to comprehend more fully when reading and listening,
and make effective choices when composing, creating, and speaking.
a. Recognize that standardized English is only one dialect of
many and has a specific history that is implicated in power
relationships.
b. Develop communicative competence by effectively
determining and appropriately responding to the language
demands of varied situations (i.e., effectively consider the
relationship between your intent as an author and the
context, purpose, genre, and audience needs of writing and
speaking situations).
c. Develop metacognitive awareness as writers and speakers,
justifying and evaluating the effectiveness of language
choices.
d. Recognize standardized guidelines and style manuals exist
for various disciplines (e.g., Modern Language Association
[MLA] in English; American Psychological Association [APA]
in education, science, and psychology); write and edit work
so that it conforms to the expectations of the discipline and
writing situation.
<<page 126>>
EE.L.9-10.3.1 Use language to achieve desired outcomes when
communicating.
a. Notice that standardized English is only one dialect of many
and has a specific history that is implicated in power
relationships.
b. Notice the language demands of a writing/speaking
situation (i.e. formal, informal) and respond in an
appropriate way.
c. Continue to develop metacognitive awareness as writers
and speakers by explaining the reasons for language
choices.
d. Not applicable
<<page 127>>
communicative goals when composing, creating, and speaking, and to
language and convention choices and explain how those choices differ
Vocabulary Acquisition & Use - Grades 9-10
L.9-10.2 Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and
multiple-meaning words and phrases in grade-level reading and
content; use context clues, analyze meaningful word parts, consult
general and specialized reference materials, and apply word solving
strategies (for meaning) as appropriate.
a. Determine the pronunciation, precise meaning, part of
speech, and etymology of words; verify by consulting
general and specialized print and digital reference materials
as appropriate.
b. Determine and correctly use patterns of word changes that
indicate different meanings or parts of speech (e.g., analyze,
analysis, analytical; advocate, advocacy).
EE.L.9-10.2 Demonstrate knowledge of word meanings.
a. Use context to determine the meaning of unknown.
b. Identify and use root words and the words that result when
affixes are added or removed.
c. Consult reference materials (dictionaries, online
vocabulary supports) to clarify the meaning of unfamiliar
words encountered when reading.
<<page 128>>
L.9-10.3 Demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word
relationships, and nuances in word meanings.
a. Determine the denotative, connotative, and figurative
meanings of words and phrases used in texts; analyze
nuances in the meaning of words with similar denotations.
b. Analyze the cumulative impact of specific word choices on
meaning, tone, and the effectiveness of a response (e.g.,
how the language evokes a sense of time, place, and culture;
how it sets a formal or informal tone).
EE.L.9-10.3 Demonstrate understanding of word relationships and
use.
a. Interpret common figures of speech.
b. Determine the intended meaning of multiple meaning
words.
L.9-10.4 Demonstrate an ability to collaboratively and
independently build vocabulary knowledge when encountering
unknown words including cultural, general academic, and discipline-
specific terms and phrases; make intentional vocabulary choices
appropriate to the context and situation.
EE.L.9-10.4 Use general academic and domain specific words and
phrases across contexts.
<<page 129>>
communicative goals when composing, creating, and speaking, and to
language and convention choices and explain how those choices differ
Conventions of Standard English - Grades 9-10
L.9-10.5 Demonstrate contextually appropriate use of the
conventions of standardized English grammar and usage when
writing or speaking. Discern when and where it is appropriate to use
standardized English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended purpose of language
choice.
a. Use parallel structure.
b. Convey specific meanings and add variety and interest to
writing and presentations through the use of various types
of phrases (e.g., noun, verb, adjectival, and prepositional)
and clauses (e.g., independent, dependent, and adverbial).
EE.L.9-10.5 Demonstrate standardized English grammar and usage
when communicating.
a. Not applicable
b. Use a variety of parts of speech (nouns, verbs, pronouns,
adjectives, and prepositions) in writing or communication
to convey information.
<<page 130>>
L.9-10.6 Demonstrate contextually appropriate use of the
conventions of standardized English capitalization, punctuation, and
spelling when writing. Discern when and where it is appropriate to
use standardized English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended purpose in conventions.
a. Use colons and semicolons appropriately.
b. Spell correctly.
EE.L.9-10.6 Demonstrate understanding of conventions of
standardized English.
a. Use a comma and conjunction to combine two simple
sentences.
b. Spell most single-syllable words correctly and apply
knowledge of word chunks in spelling longer words.
<<page 131>>