a variety of complex literary and informational
experiences of others. This includes independently
Key Ideas & Details - Grade 7
R.7.1 Cite textual evidence to support an
analysis of what the text says explicitly or
implicitly and make logical inferences.
(RI&RL)
EE.R.7.1 Analyze text to identify where
information is explicitly stated and where
inferences must be drawn. (RI&RL)
R.7.2 Summarize texts, from a variety of
genres, to determine a theme or central idea
and analyze its development over the course
of the text. (RI&RL)
EE.R.7.2 Determine details in a text that
are related to the theme or main idea and
how it is developed over the course of a
text. (RI&RL)
R.7.3 In literary texts, analyze how
elements of plot are related, affect one
another, and contribute to meaning. (RL)
In informational texts, analyze how
individuals, events, and ideas are introduced,
related to each other, and developed. (RI)
EE.R.7.3 In literary texts determine how
two or more story elements are related. (RL)
In informational texts, identify how two
individuals, events, or ideas are related. (RI)
<<page 43>>
<<page 44>>
a variety of complex literary and informational
experiences of others. This includes independently
Craft & Structure - Grade 7
R.7.4 Determine the meaning of words
and phrases, including figurative and
connotative meanings. Analyze the impact of
specific word choices on meaning, tone, and
mood, including words with multiple
meanings within a text. (RI&RL)
EE.R.7.4 Determine how word choice
changes the meaning in a text. (RI&RL)
R.7.5 In literary texts, analyze how
structure, including genre-specific features,
contributes to the development of themes
or central ideas. (RL)
In informational texts, analyze the structure
an author uses to organize a text, including
how the sections contribute to the whole
and to the development of themes or central
ideas. (RI)
EE.R.7.5 Given guidance and support,
compare the structure of two or more texts
(e.g., stories, poems, dramas, argument,
directions, informational) and determine
how a fact, step, or event fits into the overall
structure of the text. (RI&RL)
R.7.6 In literary texts, analyze how an
author develops and contrasts the point of
view, possible biases, and the perspectives
of different characters or narrators. (RL)
In informational texts, explain how an
author’s geographic location, identity, or
<<page 45>>
culture affect perspective. Analyze how the
author distinguishes his or her position from
that of others. (RI)
EE.R.7.6 Identify words or phrases in the
text that describe or show the narrator,
speaker, or author’s point of view. (RI&RL)
<<page 46>>
a variety of complex literary and informational
experiences of others. This includes independently
Integration of Knowledge & Ideas -
Grade 7
R.7.7 Compare and contrast a written
text with audio, filmed, staged, or digital
versions in order to analyze the effects of
techniques unique to each media and each
format’s portrayal of a subject. (RI&RL)
EE.R.7.7 Compare a text to an audio, video,
or multimedia version of the same
text. (RI&RL)
R.7.8 Trace and evaluate the
development of an argument and specific
claims in a text. Assess whether the
reasoning is valid and the evidence is
relevant and sufficient. Recognize when
irrelevant evidence is introduced. (RI)
EE.R.7.8 Determine how a claim or reason
fits into the overall structure of a text. (RI)
R.7.9 Evaluate the quality of texts. Make
connections to other texts, ideas, cultural
perspectives, identities, eras, and personal
experiences. (RI&RL)
EE.R.7.9 Compare and contrast how two
texts describe details and make connections
to other texts, ideas, cultural perspectives,
<<page 47>>
identities, eras, or personal
experiences. (RI&RL)
<<page 48>>
of culturally-sustaining and rhetorically authentic
and shorter time frames.
Text Types & Purposes - Grade 7
W.7.1 Compose reflective, formal, and
creative writing, which may happen
simultaneously or independently, for a
variety of high-stakes and low-stakes
purposes.
EE.W.7.1 With guidance and support, use
drawing, dictating, or writing to compose
writing for a variety of high-stakes and low-
stakes purposes.
W.7.2 Write text in a variety of modes.
a. Write arguments to support claims
with clear reasons, relevant
evidence, and literary theory.
Introduce claim(s), acknowledge
alternate or opposing claims, and
organize the reasons and evidence
logically. Use accurate, credible
sources.
b. Write informative text that
examines a topic and conveys ideas,
concepts, and information through
the selection and organization of
relevant content by introducing
and developing a topic with
relevant, well-chosen facts,
definitions, concrete details,
quotations, or other information
and examples, organizing ideas,
<<page 69>>
concepts, and information into
broader categories; include
formatting (e.g., headings), graphics
(e.g., charts, tables), and multimedia
when useful to aiding
comprehension.
c. Write narratives that develop real
or imagined experiences or events
using relevant descriptive details
and well-structured event
sequences that organize an event
sequence logically. Engage and
orient the reader by establishing a
context and point of view and
introduce a narrator or characters
using techniques, such as dialogue,
pacing, description, and reflection,
to develop experiences, events, and
characters.
EE.W.7.2 With guidance and support, use
writing and/or dictation to write in a variety
of modes:
a. Write an argument with a clearly
stated claim about a topic and
include clear reasons to support
that claim.
b. Write informative texts which
introduce a topic and provide facts,
details, and/or multimedia content
to develop the topic. Provide a
concluding statement.
c. Write narratives to convey events
and experiences, real or imagined.
Include dialogue, details, and tell
about the events in the order in
which they occurred.
<<page 70>>
<<page 71>>
of culturally-sustaining and rhetorically authentic
and shorter time frames.
Text Types & Purposes- Grade 7 (cont.)
W.7.3 Create writing that utilizes:
a. Organization: Provide an
introduction that creates suspense
and anticipation for the reader.
Structure of the text supports and
clarifies the purpose and topic.
Provide a concluding statement
appropriate to the mode of writing.
b. Transitions: Use a variety of
appropriate transitions that
connect and develop ideas.
c. Word Choice (including domain
specific): Use words, phrases, and
clauses to create cohesion and
clarify the relationships. Use
sensory language to describe
experiences and events.
EE.W.7.3 Use a combination of drawing,
dictating and writing to create a text
that includes an introduction, body, and
conclusion, uses words that convey specific
details, transitions to link and build
connections, and temporal words to signal
event order.
<<page 72>>
of culturally-sustaining and rhetorically authentic
and shorter time frames.
Production & Distribution of Writing -
Grade 7
W.7.4 Independently and collaboratively
produce clear and coherent writing in which
the development, organization, and style
are culturally-sustaining and rhetorically
authentic to task, purpose, and audience.
(Grade-specific expectations for writing
types are defined in standards 1–3 above.)
EE.W.7.4 Independently and
collaboratively produce writing that is
appropriate for the task, purpose, or
audience.
W.7.5 With some guidance and support
from peers and adults, develop and
strengthen writing as needed by planning,
revising, editing, rewriting, or trying a new
approach, focusing on how well purpose and
audience have been addressed.
EE.W.7.5 With guidance and support from
adults and peers, plan before writing and
produce writing focused on the planned
topic, and revise and edit their own writing,
dictation, or pictures.
W.7.6 Use technology, (including paper
and pencil, internet, audio, visual,
multilingual, multimodal, mobile, or other
interactive formats), to produce and publish
<<page 73>>
writing and present the relationships
between information and ideas efficiently,
as well as to interact and collaborate with
others, including linking to and citing
sources.
EE.W.7.6 Use technology, (including paper
and pencil, internet, audio, visual, and/or
other interactive formats) to produce
writing to interact and collaborate with
others. Produce writing through printing,
cursive, and/or typing.
<<page 74>>
of culturally-sustaining and rhetorically authentic
and shorter time frames.
Inquiry to Build & Present Knowledge
- Grade 7
W.7.7 Conduct short inquiry projects to
answer a question, drawing on several
sources and generating additional related,
focused questions for further research and
investigation.
EE.W.7.7 With guidance and support,
conduct short inquiry projects to answer a
question.
W.7.8 Gather relevant information from
multiple print and digital sources using
search terms effectively, assess the
credibility and accuracy of each source,
quote or paraphrase the data and
conclusions of others while avoiding
plagiarism and following a standard format
for citation.
EE.W.7.8 Identify quotes providing
relevant information about a topic from
multiple print or digital sources.
W.7.9 Draw evidence from literary or
informational texts to support analysis,
reflection, and inquiry. (Apply grade 7
Reading standards)
<<page 75>>
EE.W.7.9 With guidance and support from
adults, draw evidence from literary or
informational texts to support reflection or
inquiry questions based on a reading of a
literary or informational text.
<<page 76>>
and adapt speech to a variety of purposes, audiences,
and how those choices differ for culture
Comprehension & Collaboration -
Grade 7
SL.7.1 Engage effectively in a range of
collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in
groups, and teacher-led) with diverse
partners on topics, texts, and issues, building
on others' ideas and expressing one’s
thinking clearly.
a. Come to discussions prepared and
explicitly draw on that preparation
by referring to evidence on the
topic, text, or issue. Support analysis
by making connections,
paraphrasing, clarifying, or
explaining the evidence.
b. With guidance and support, set and
track specific norms and goals for
collegial discussions (e.g., gaining
attention in respectful ways,
actively listening, speaking one at a
time about the topics and texts
under discussion).
c. Pose questions that invite
elaboration and respond to others'
questions and comments with
relevant observations and ideas that
bring the discussion back on topic as
needed. Promote multiple
perspectives.
<<page 93>>
and adapt speech to a variety of purposes, audiences,
and how those choices differ for culture
Comprehension & Collaboration -
Grade 7 (cont.)
d. Review the key ideas expressed and
demonstrate an understanding of
multiple perspectives through
analysis, including reflection,
clarification, and paraphrasing.
EE.SL.7.1 Engage in collaborative
discussions.
a. Come to discussions prepared to
share information, with evidence.
b. With guidance and support from
adults and peers, follow simple,
agreed-upon norms for discussions
and contribute information.
c. Remain on the topic of the
discussion when answering
questions or making other
contributions to a discussion.
d. Acknowledge new information and
multiple perspectives expressed by
others in a discussion.
SL.7.2 Analyze the main ideas and
supporting details presented in diverse
media and formats and explain how the
ideas clarify a topic, text, or issue under
study.
<<page 94>>
EE.SL.7.2 Identify details related to the main
idea of a text presented orally or through
other media.
SL.7.3 Understand and evaluate a
speaker’s argument and specific claims,
evaluating the soundness of the reasoning
and the relevance and sufficiency of the
evidence.
EE.SL.7.3 Determine whether the claims
made by a speaker are fact or opinion.
<<page 95>>
and adapt speech to a variety of purposes, audiences,
and how those choices differ for culture
Presentation of Knowledge & Ideas -
Grade 7
SL.7.4 Present claims and findings,
emphasizing significant points in a focused,
coherent manner using relevant evidence.
Communicate clearly and in an engaging
manner, considering the audience, purpose,
and situation. Explain purpose of language
choices.
EE.SL.7.4 Clearly present findings on a
topic including relevant descriptions, facts,
or details, considering the audience.
SL.7.5 Include multimedia components and
visual displays in presentations to clarify
claims and findings and emphasize
significant points.
EE.SL.7.5 Select or create audio recordings
and visual/tactile displays to emphasize
specific points in a presentation.
<<page 96>>
of how language functions in different
and speaking, and to comprehend more fully
those choices differ for culture and context.
Knowledge of Language - Grade 7
L.7.1 Demonstrate an understanding of
how language functions in different cultures,
contexts, and disciplines; apply this
knowledge to comprehend more fully when
reading and listening, and make effective
choices when composing, creating, and
speaking.
a. Recognize that standardized English
is only one dialect of many and has a
specific history that is implicated in
power relationships.
b. Determine the language demands of
a writing or speaking situation;
respond in appropriate ways (e.g.,
precise and concise language,
extended and descriptive language,
incorporation of code-meshing,
etc.).
c. Maintain consistency in style and
tone.
d. When appropriate, eliminate
wordiness and redundancy.
<<page 119>>
EE.L.7.1 Use language to achieve desired
outcomes when communicating.
a. Notice that standardized English is
only one dialect of many and has a
specific history that is implicated in
power relationships.
b. Notice the language demands of a
writing/speaking situation (i.e.
formal, informal) and respond in an
appropriate way.
c. Maintain consistency in use of
language.
d. Notice redundancy in language.
<<page 120>>
of how language functions in different
and speaking, and to comprehend more fully
those choices differ for culture and context.
Vocabulary Acquisition &Use -
Grade 7
L.7.2 Determine or clarify the meaning of
unknown and multiple-meaning words and
phrases in grade-level reading and content;
use context clues, analyze meaningful word
parts, consult general and specialized
reference materials, and apply word solving
strategies (for meaning) as appropriate
a. Verify the preliminary
determination of the meaning of a
word or phrase (e.g., by checking the
inferred meaning in context or in a
dictionary).
b. Use grade-appropriate Greek or
Latin affixes and roots as clues to
the meaning of a word.
EE.L.7.2 Demonstrate knowledge of word
meanings.
a. Use context to determine which
word is missing from a text.
b. Use frequently occurring root
words (e.g., like) and the words that
result when affixes are added (e.g.,
liked, disliked, liking).
c. Seek clarification and meaning
support when unfamiliar words are
encountered while reading or
communicating.
<<page 121>>
of how language functions in different
and speaking, and to comprehend more fully
those choices differ for culture and context.
Vocabulary Acquisition &Use -
Grade 7 (cont.)
L.7.3 Demonstrate understanding of
figurative language, word relationships, and
nuances in word meanings.
Determine the denotative, connotative, and
figurative meanings of words and phrases
used in texts; when words have similar
denotations, be able to describe differences
in connotation and their impact on meaning
and tone.
Analyze the impact of rhyme and other
repetitions of sound (e.g., alliteration,
assonance) in varied texts (e.g., poetry,
drama, section of a story).
<<page 122>>
EE.L.7.3 Demonstrate understanding of
word relationships and use.
a. Identify the literal and nonliteral
meanings of words in context.
b. Identify rhyme and repetition
(letters, words, or phrases)
L.7.4 Demonstrate an ability to
collaboratively and independently build
vocabulary knowledge when encountering
unknown words including cultural, general
academic, and discipline-specific terms and
phrases; make intentional vocabulary
choices appropriate to the context and
situation.
EE.L.7.4 Use general academic and domain-
specific words and phrases across contexts.
<<page 123>>
of how language functions in different
and speaking, and to comprehend more fully
those choices differ for culture and context.
Conventions of Standardized English -
Grade 7
L.7.5 Demonstrate contextually
appropriate use of the conventions of
standardized English grammar and usage
when writing or speaking. Discern when and
where it is appropriate to use standardized
English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended
purpose of language choice with:
a. phrases and clauses;
b. simple, compound, and complex
sentences signaling differing
relationships among ideas; and
c. recognizing and correcting dangling
modifiers.
EE.L.7.5 Demonstrate standardized English
grammar and usage when communicating.
a. Use simple phrases.
b. Produce complete simple sentences
when writing or communicating.
c. Not applicable
<<page 124>>
L.7.6 Demonstrate contextually
appropriate use of the conventions of
standardized English capitalization,
punctuation, and spelling when writing.
Discern when and where it is appropriate to
use standardized English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended
purpose in conventions with:
a. commas to separate coordinate
adjectives and
b. correct spelling.
EE.L.7.6 Demonstrate understanding of
conventions of standardized English.
a. Use end punctuation when writing a
sentence or question.
b. Spell words phonetically, drawing
on knowledge of letter- sound
relationships and/or common
spelling patterns.
<<page 125>>