Phonics & Word Recognition - Grade 5
RF.5.3 Know and apply grade-level phonics
and word analysis skills in decoding words.
a. Use combined knowledge of all
letter-sound correspondences,
syllabication patterns, and
morphology (e.g., roots and affixes)
to read accurately unfamiliar
multisyllabic words in context and
out of context.
EE.RF.5.3 Use letter-sound knowledge to
read words.
a. Decode and encode common sight
words and single syllable words.
See L.5.6 for additional
spelling/encoding/word analysis guidance.
<<page 31>>
<<page 32>>
Fluency - Grade 5
RF.5.4 Read with sufficient accuracy and
fluency to support comprehension.
a. Read grade-level text with purpose
and understanding.
b. Read grade-level text orally with
accuracy, appropriate rate, and
expression on successive readings.
c. Use context to confirm or self-
correct word recognition and
understanding, rereading as
necessary.
EE.RF.5.4 Read words in text.
Read text comprised of familiar words with
accuracy and understanding.
a. Use features of print to identify or
verbalize appropriate expression
while reading familiar texts.
b. Use letter-sound knowledge and
context to confirm or self-correct
word recognition when reading.
<<page 33>>
texts for many purposes (including enjoyment),
and proficiently understanding grade-level text.
Key Ideas & Details - Grade 5
R.5.1 Locate and refer to relevant details
and evidence when explaining what a text
says explicitly or implicitly and make logical
inferences. (RI&RL)
EE.R.5.1 Identify explicit details in a
text. (RI&RL)
R.5.2 Summarize texts, from a variety of
genres, to determine a theme or central idea
and explain how it is supported by key
details. (RI&RL)
EE.R.5.2 Identify the theme or main idea
from a text when it is not explicitly
stated. (RI&RL)
R.5.3 Compare and contrast two or more
characters, settings, and events, drawing on
specific details in the text. (RL) Explain the
relationships or interactions between two or
more individuals, events, ideas, or concepts
based on specific evidence from the text. (RI)
EE.R.5.3 Compare two characters in a
familiar story. (RL) Compare two individuals,
events or ideas in a text. (RI)
<<page 39>>
texts for many purposes (including enjoyment),
and proficiently understanding grade-level text.
Craft & Structure - Grade 5
R.5.4 Determine the meaning of words,
phrases, figurative language, academic and
content-specific words, and analyze their
effect on meaning, tone, and mood within a
text. (RI&RL)
EE.R.5.4 Determine the intended meaning
of multimeaning and domain-specific words
and phrases. (RI&RL)
R.5.5 Explain how a series of chapters,
scenes, or stanzas fits together to determine
the overall structure of a story, drama, or
poem. (RL) Compare and contrast the overall
structure in two or more texts using terms
such as sequence, comparison, cause and
effect, and problem and solution. (RI)
EE.R.5.5 With guidance and support,
identify a story element that undergoes
change from beginning to end (RL) and
determine if a text tells about events, gives
directions, or provides information on a
topic (RI).
R.5.6 In literary text, explain how a
narrator’s or speaker’s point of view
influences how events are described. (RL)
In informational text, analyze multiple
accounts of the same event or topic, noting
important similarities and differences in the
point of view they represent. (RI)
<<page 40>>
EE.R.5.6 With guidance and support,
determine the point of view of a narrator
(RL); compare two texts on the same topic
(RI).
<<page 41>>
texts for many purposes (including enjoyment),
and proficiently understanding grade-level text.
Integration of Knowledge & Ideas -
Grade 5
R.5.7 Analyze how visual and multimedia
elements contribute to the meaning of
literary and informational texts. (RI&RL)
EE.R.5.7 Identify illustrations, tactual or
multimedia elements that add to
understanding of a text. (RI&RL)
R.5.8 Explain how claims in a text are
supported by relevant reasons and evidence,
identifying which reasons and evidence
support which claims. (RI)
EE.R.5.8 Identify the relationship between
a specific point and supporting reasons in a
text. (RI)
R.5.9 Make informed judgments about
quality of text; make connections to other
texts, ideas, cultural perspectives, identities,
eras, and personal experiences. (RI&RL)
EE.R.5.9 Compare and contrast details
gained from two texts and make connections
to other texts, ideas, cultural perspectives,
identities, eras, personal events, or
situations. (RI&RL)
<<page 42>>
authentic tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
Text Types & Purposes - Grade 5
W.5.1 Compose reflective, formal, and
creative writing, which may happen
simultaneously or independently, for a variety of
high-stakes and low-stakes purposes.
EE.W.5.1 With guidance and support, use
drawing, dictating, or writing to compose writing
for a variety of high-stakes and low-stakes
purposes.
W.5.2 Write text in a variety of modes.
a. Opinion pieces that support a point of
view about a topic or text clearly, state
an opinion, and create an organizational
structure in which ideas are logically
ordered to support facts, details, and
the writer's purpose.
b. Informative text that introduces a topic
clearly, use topic- and genre-specific
language to provide a general
observation, focus, and group related
information logically. Include
formatting (e.g., headings), illustrations,
and multimedia when useful to aiding
comprehension and to link ideas within
and across categories of information.
c. Convey events, real or imagined,
through narrative or short stories
which orients a reader by establishing a
real or imagined situation and
<<page 62>>
introducing a narrator and characters;
organize an event sequence that
unfolds naturally. Use narrative
techniques, such as dialogue,
description, and pacing, to develop
experiences and events or show the
responses of characters to situations.
EE.W.5.2 With guidance and support, use
writing, dictation and/or drawing to compose:
a. Opinion pieces in which they clearly
state an opinion about a topic or text
and include some reasons to support
that opinion.
b. Informative/Explanatory text in which
they introduce a topic and provide
some facts, details, and/or multimedia
content about a predetermined or self
chosen topic.
c. Convey events, real or imagined and
narrate a single event or several
loosely linked events. Include some
details regarding what happened
and tell about the events in the order in
which they occurred.
<<page 63>>
authentic tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
Text Types & Purposes - Grade 5
(cont.)
W.5.3 Create writing that utilizes:
a. Organization: Include an
introduction that establishes a
purpose and engages the reader.
Text builds to a concluding
statement appropriate to the mode
of writing and related to the body
of the composition.
b. Transitions: Use a variety of
transitional words and phrases that
logically connect and develop ideas.
c. Word Choice (including domain
specific): Creatively select unique
words for emphasis, addition,
contrast, or order.
EE.W.5.3 Use a combination of drawing,
dictating and writing to create a text
that includes an introduction, body, and
conclusion. uses familiar words, transitions
to link and build connections, and temporal
words to signal event order.
<<page 64>>
authentic tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
Production & Distribution of Writing -
Grade 5
W.5.4 Produce clear and coherent writing
in which the development and organization
are culturally-sustaining and rhetorically
authentic to task, purpose, and audience.
(Grade-specific expectations for writing
types are defined in standards 1–3 above.)
EE.W.5.4 Produce writing that is
appropriate for an explicitly stated task or
purpose, and expresses more than one idea.
W.5.5 Produce clear and coherent writing
in which the development and organization
are intentionally selected by teacher or
student for task, purpose, and audience;
respond to questions and suggestions from
peers; and add details to strengthen writing
as needed by planning, revising, and editing.
EE.W.5.5 With guidance and support from
adults and peers, plan before writing and
produce writing focused on the planned
topic, and revise their own writing,
dictation, or pictures.
W.5.6 With some guidance and support
from adults, they intentionally select a
variety of digital tools to produce and
<<page 65>>
publish writing, including in collaboration
with peers. Proficiently produce writing
through printing, cursive, or typing (with
sufficient command of keyboarding skills to
type a minimum of two pages in a single
sitting).
EE.W.5.6With guidance and support
from adults, use digital tools, including
the Internet, to produce writing while
interacting and collaborating with
others. Learn to produce writing through
printing, cursive, and/or typing.
<<page 66>>
authentic tasks, purposes, and audiences over extended
Inquiry to Build & Present Knowledge
- Grade 5
W.5.7 Conduct short student-driven
inquiry projects that use several sources to
build knowledge through investigation of
different aspects of a topic.
EE.W.5.7 With guidance and support,
identify information about two or more
aspects of a shared or independent inquiry
topic.
W.5.8 Recall relevant information from
experiences or gather relevant information
from print and digital sources, summarize or
paraphrase information in notes and
finished work, and provide a list of sources.
EE.W.5.8 Recall relevant information from
experiences or gather relevant information
from print or digital sources, sort
information into given categories, and write
or draw about each one.
W.5.9 Draw evidence from literary or
informational texts to support analysis,
reflection, and inquiry.
EE.W.5.9 With guidance and support from
adults, recall key details from literary or
informational texts to support reflection or
inquiry questions based on a reading of a
literary or informational text.
<<page 67>>
<<page 68>>
and situations in order to meet communicative
and context.
Comprehension & Collaboration -
Grade 5
SL.5.1 Engage effectively in a range of
collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in
groups, and teacher-led) with diverse
partners on topics and texts, building on
others' ideas and expressing one’s thinking
clearly.
a. Come to discussions prepared,
explicitly draw on topics and texts
along with personal knowledge and
experiences to explore ideas under
discussion.
b. Follow agreed-upon norms for
discussions (e.g., gaining attention in
respectful ways, actively listening,
speaking one at a time about the
topics and texts under discussion).
c. Pose and respond to specific
questions by making comments that
contribute to the discussion and
elaborate on the remarks of others.
d. Review the key ideas expressed and
draw conclusions in light of
information and knowledge gained
from the discussion.
<<page 89>>
EE.SL.5.1 Engage in collaborative
discussions.
a. Come to discussion prepared to
share information from a source
such as a text or personal
knowledge.
b. Listen to others’ ideas before
responding, gain attention
respectfully, and contribute to the
discussion.
c. Ask questions related to
information in a discussion.
d. Make comments that contribute to
the discussion and link to the
remarks of others.
<<page 90>>
and situations in order to meet communicative
and context.
Comprehension & Collaboration -
Grade 5 (cont.)
SL.5.2 Summarize a written text read aloud
or information presented in diverse media
and formats.
EE.SL.5.2 Identify the explicitly stated main
idea of a text presented orally or through
other media.
SL.5.3 Summarize the points a speaker
makes and explain how each claim is
supported by reasons and evidence.
EE.SL.5.3 Identify the reasons and
evidence supporting a specific point that the
speaker makes.
Presentation of Knowledge & Ideas -
Grade 5
SL.5.4 Report on a topic or text or present
an opinion, sequencing ideas logically and
using facts and relevant, descriptive details
to support main ideas or themes; speak
clearly at an understandable pace.
Communicate clearly and in an engaging
manner, considering the audience, purpose,
and situation.
<<page 91>>
EE.SL.5.4 Clearly report on a familiar topic
or text or present an opinion including
related facts.
SL.5.5 Integrate multimedia components
(e.g., graphics, sound) and visual displays in
presentations to enhance the development
of main ideas or themes.
EE.SL.5.5 Select or create audio recordings
and visual/tactile displays to enhance a
presentation.
<<page 92>>
cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
Knowledge of Language - Grade 5
L.5.1 Demonstrate an understanding of
how language functions in different cultures,
contexts, and disciplines; apply this
knowledge to comprehend more fully when
reading and listening, and make effective
choices when composing, creating, and
speaking.
a. Recognize that standardized English
is only one dialect of many and has a
specific history that is implicated in
power relationships.
b. Compare and contrast the ways in
which language is used in familiar
and unfamiliar contexts (e.g., at
home, outside of their own
communities, by diverse authors
and speakers).
c. Compare and contrast the varieties
of English (e.g., dialects, registers)
used in stories, dramas, or poems.
d. Expand, combine, and reduce
sentences for meaning, reader or
listener interest, and style.
<<page 110>>
EE.L.5.1 Use language to achieve desired
meaning when communicating.
a. Notice that standardized English is
only one dialect of many.
b. Notice the differences in language
between familiar and unfamiliar
contexts.
c. Notice the varieties of English (e.g.,
dialects, registers) used in stories,
dramas, or poems.
d. Expand sentences for meaning,
interest, and style.
<<page 111>>
cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
Vocabulary Acquisition & Use –
Grade 5
L.5.2 Determine or clarify the meaning of
unknown and multiple-meaning words and
phrases in grade-level reading and content;
use context clues, analyze meaningful word
parts, consult general and specialized
reference materials, and apply word solving
strategies (for meaning) as appropriate.
a. Use common, grade-appropriate
Greek and Latin affixes and roots as
clues to the meaning of a word (e.g.,
telegraph, photograph, autograph).
EE.L.5.2 Demonstrate knowledge of word
meanings.
a. Use frequently occurring root
words (e.g., talk) and the words that
result when word endings are added
(e.g., talked, talking, talks).
<<page 112>>
cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
Vocabulary Acquisition & Use -
Grade 5 (cont.)
L.5.3 Demonstrate understanding of
figurative language, word relationships, and
nuances in word meanings.
a. Determine the meaning of words
and phrases as they are used in a
text, including those that allude to
significant characters (e.g.,
Herculean).
b. Interpret similes and metaphors in
context.
c. Clarify the precise meaning of
words by comparing and contrasting
them with related words (i.e.,
compare and contrast words to
synonyms, antonyms, and
homographs to better understand
each word).
d. Make connections between words
and how they are used in real life
(i.e., help students build or add on to
existing schema when encountering
new words).
<<page 113>>
EE.L.5.3 Demonstrate understanding of
word relationship and use.
a. Determine the literal meaning of
words and phrases in context.
b. Not applicable
c. Demonstrate understanding of
words that have similar meanings
d. Identify words that describe an
increasing number of personal
emotional states.
<<page 114>>
cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
Vocabulary Acquisition & Use -
Grade 5 (cont.)
L.5.4 Demonstrate an ability to
collaboratively and independently build
vocabulary knowledge when encountering
unknown words including cultural, general
academic, and discipline-specific terms and
phrases; use vocabulary appropriate to the
context and situation.
a. Identify and use phrases that signal
contrast, addition, and other logical
relationships (e.g., however,
although, nevertheless, similarly,
moreover, in addition).
EE.L.5.6 Use words acquired through
conversations, being read to, and during
shared reading activities including domain-
specific words.
a. Identify conjunctions
<<page 115>>
cultures and contexts. Apply this knowledge to meet
when reading and listening. Be able to justify intentional
Conventions of Standardized English -
Grade 5
L.5.5 Demonstrate contextually
appropriate use of the conventions of
standardized English grammar and usage
when writing or speaking. Discern when and
where it is appropriate to use standardized
English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended
purpose of language choice with:
a. conjunctions,
b. verb tenses,
c. correlative conjunctions, and
d. use of “they” and “their” when
referring to singular people or ideas.
<<page 116>>
EE.L.5.5 Demonstrate standardized English
grammar and usage when communicating.
a. Use frequently occurring
conjunctions: and, but, or, for,
because.
b. Form and use the past tense of
frequently occurring irregular verbs
(e.g., went, sat, ate, told).
c. Not applicable
d. Not applicable
L.5.6 Demonstrate contextually
appropriate use of the conventions of
standardized English capitalization,
punctuation, and spelling when writing.
Discern when and where it is appropriate to
use standardized English.
Appropriately use and explain the intended
purpose in conventions with:
a. commas (introductory elements,
and elements that need to be set off
like a question or direct address);
b. italics, underlining, quotes with
titles; and
c. spell grade-level words correctly
using reference materials to solve
words and edit written work as
needed.
<<page 117>>
EE.L.5.6 Demonstrate understanding of
conventions of standardized English.
a. Not applicable
b. Not applicable
c. Spell untaught word phonetically,
drawing on letter-sound
relationships and common spelling
patterns.
<<page 118>>